Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're
moving towards establishing multisets that's
a really flexible and powerful tool to organize
mathematical structures but also to set the stage
for abstract algebra so it will turn out that
this notion of multi sets is actually very very
flexible and fundamental allows us to organize
systematically a lot of interesting topics such
as group Theory ring theory field theory and other
things so multi sets are in fact arguably much
more flexible and powerful notion than set theory
set theories perhaps to be thought of as a special
case of multi set theory still interesting but
really part of the bigger picture so today what
we're going to do is were to take the concepts
that we introduced from the natural numbers
last time we talked about the natural numbers
as forming a realm where we have these three
operations addition Union and intersection just
considered as operations on the natural numbers
actually natural numbers extended with zero so the
union of two natural numbers was just the max and
the intersection of two natural numbers was just
the min and we saw that we had all kinds of nice
properties in terms of the interaction between
these three operations so today we're going to
observe that that structure translates almost
verbatim to this much larger situation of multi
sets we're considering M set and k km sets from
n and as a natural number one of these K M sets
is well an M set which has K elements each or
the elements is a natural number between 1 and
n so n is fixed K is fixed then we have a precise
meaning of what a km set is from n in this video
we want to this a little bit so we're going to
consider the realm em set n now only depending
on the single number n so we're considering here
M sets which are built from the numbers 1 through
n those are always the ingredients but the sizes
of these M sets is variable it's not fixed to be
a certain K we're allowing different K's together
in the same story and we'll see that it's this
situation that allows us to extend these three
operations from the natural numbers into this
setting here and we'll see that we get our realm M
set n which extends naturally the realm of natural
numbers so very interesting powerful flexible
kind of arrangement here there's still very
precise we're still talking about mathematical
objects about which we can all agree completely
ok all the entries have to be numbers from 1 to
n and has to be fixed and we're specifying that
in each and every case the natural numbers
that appear have to be in hindu-arabic form
no alternate descriptions are allowed so we know
precisely what we're talking about and everybody
can agree whether a given object is in here or not
in here so the essence of mathematics is I want to
emphasize right that we all know exactly what
we are talking about so one of the features of
this development is that we're allowing ourselves
to extend our notions so once we've agreed on a
certain kind of mathematical object we are allowed
to later on extend and make it bigger increase the
size of the arena in which we're working so we're
doing here now we're considering multi sets from n
where there is no longer a specific K dependence
we're allowing the K to be variable so suppose N
is a natural number 1 2 3 4 5 etc a multiset
for in what let me it is a km set from n for
some K in natural numbers plus and this type is
M set N so for example M set 5 it's a new type
of mathematical object which consists of all the
km sets from 5 that we can think about that we
can write down here is one where K is 4 here's
one where K is 3 K is 0 K is well whatever it
is 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 okay so
these are all examples of multi sets from five
because all of the actual entries are 1 of 1
2 3 4 or 5 so all the elements are from this
collection and if M is an M set of 5 and L is
a natural number then where L is one of these
numbers from 1 to 5 then this is how we will
denote the multiplicity of Ala damn so little
M sub Capital m of L the multiplicity of L in
M so this is counting how many times the number
L appears as an element in our M set capital M
so the multiplicity is always a natural number
or possibly 0 and this is very important a number
associated to this L so we're counting the number
of times a given element from 1 to 5 occurs so the
multiset is really determined by knowing how many
times the 1 occurs how many times the 2 occurs
how many times the 3 occurs how many times the 4
occurs how many times the 5 occurs we know those
5 multiplicities then we know the multiset in m
set 5 and it's these multiplicities that really
give us the link between this em set theory and
the realm of natural numbers that we talked
about in our last video right so just to make
sure that we understand our notation here's
a few examples so here is a M set capital A
which is consisting of 1 2 1 & 3 here is B which
consists of 5 5 5 C which is the empty set and D
which is 3 3 3 1 1 2 4 5 4 4 5 1 1 3 2 and let me
remind you that we're talking about multi sets so
the order here is unimportant because there
are no commas there's only spaces separating
the elements that's our convention for the data
structure being unordered it's on multi set and
repetitions are allowed that's represented by the
fact that we have square brackets so these are all
in M set 5 because all of the actual elements that
appear are from 1 to 5 ok so the multiplicity of
1 in a is 2 the multiplicity of 2 in a is 1 years
once multiplicity of 3 in a is 1 the multiplicity
of 4 and a is 0 the multiplicity of 1 in B is 0
multiplicity of 5 in B is 3 the multiplicity of 7
in C is 0 ok 7 is actually not a possible element
of M set 5 but we could probably safely say that
the multiplicity of this 7 is still 0 it doesn't
occur and the multiplicity of 5 in D is 2 because
there's two of them right there so clearly if
Capital m is a M set from 5 then the multiplicity
of any L in M is 0 if L is bigger than 5 all the
elements have to be in the range 1 through 5 so
if we ask for the multiplicity of 6 7 8 or 3,000
it will necessarily be 0 if our capital M is an M
that from 5:00 okay so here is another M set e
and M sent from five the multiplicity of 1 and
E is ten one two three four five six seven
eight nine ten yes and the multiplicity of
2 and E is five one two three four five so the
multiplicity can be very large okay there's no
real bound on the multiplicity that we're talking
about here we are allowing K multi-sets even for
very large K although they the five is fixed
the size of the multisets that we're talking
about is not fixed can be very large even if this
n is actually small all right so I hope that what
I'm doing here is kind of obvious that you'll
think this is so Elementary you're just making
up kind of pretty reasonable natural definitions
that are easy to understand so I hope you have
that point of view but still it's important to
establish our notation so we know precisely what
we're talking about and it will turn out that this
algebra of multisets turns out to be considerably
more interesting and useful than maybe appears at
first glance okay so now things heat up a little
bit because we introduced the operations in M
set of n so suppose that capital A and B are M
sets from N for some fixed and a natural number
right so we are now going to define a plus B a
union B and a intersect B which also belong to
M set of M so we choose two things that are of
this type then these operations give us another
object also of the same type right so how are
we going to define these operations we're going
to define them in perhaps a somewhat novel way
just going to define them in terms of the
multiplicities of elements so have a good
look at these definitions so where did he
find a plus B to be the multiset such that
the multiplicity of L and a plus B is the sum of
the multiplicities of L in a and in B what's this
mean well it means that the hell is a natural
number that the number of times L appears in a
plus B is exactly the sum of the number of times
it appears in a and the number of times it appears
in B now since a and B are actually in M set of
n we could have said that we're just restricting
ourselves to ELLs from the range 1 through N and
exactly in a similar fashion we define the Union a
union B by the condition that the multiplicity of
L in a union B is the union of the multiplicities
of L and a and in B and I remind you that Union
at the level of natural numbers is maximum so
we're seeing how many times L appears at a and B
taking the maximum of that and that's the number
of times L appears in the Union that's for L
a natural number but in fact we only need to
check from 1 to n and intersection similarly
the multiplicity of L in a intersect B is the
intersection of the multiplicity of Ln a and the
multiplicity of L and B which is the minimum of
the numbers of times at L appears of a and appears
in B so we need actually only check eles from 1
through n because everything here is in M set
of n but it's a completely finite procedure to
compute specifically this sum the Union and the
intersection of any two given M sets from n notice
this very efficient kind of way of defining what
these things are it's maybe more precise than what
you're used to when we defined union of sets how
does one define the union of sets well we haven't
really talked about that yet because we haven't
talked about set theory but if you think about how
you define unions of sets from naive set theory
that's a little bit vague I think okay here being
very precise we know exactly a range of values
we know exactly what it is that we're computing
we can check mechanically and convincingly
completely whether we've actually taken the
Union or an intersection or a sum and crucially
what distinguishes this from ordinary set theory
is the possibility of taking the sum of two m
sets that's something you cannot do in ordinary
set theory that's what makes this thing actually
considerably more interesting in some levels then
set theory okay so an example let's work in M set
of three so here's a which is an element of M set
three so it's a multi set from three because all
the elements are ones twos and threes and not any
other things here this B is also an M set from
three so what is a plus B well that's the sum so
we have to some multiplicities so the element one
occurs four times here at one time here so we have
to put five of them in the sum now a two occurs
once here and three here so we have to put four
of them in the sum I'm with three occurs once here
and zero times here so we have to put one three in
the sum how about the Union Union corresponds to
maximum of multiplicities so one occurs four times
here once here the maximum of those two numbers
is four so in the Union one will occur four times
two curves once here and three times here the
maximum of 1 & 3 is 3 so 2 occurs 3 times 3
occurs one here at zero times here the max between
1 & 0 is 1 so the 3 occurs once and what about the
intersection a intersect B well there we have to
take minimums of multiplicities so what occurs
four times here once here the minimum of that is
1 so there's 1 1 to occur is once here and 3 times
here the minimum of that is 1 so there's 1 2 & 3
occurs once here and 0 times there the minimum of
that is 0 and so 3 occurs at 0 times there so it's
very concrete and methodical so what we're really
doing is we're just considering each element 1 2 3
separately make the calculation for the element 1
calculation for the element 2 calculation for the
element 3 and keeping them all separate and so we
may now check that each of the laws established
for the realm not plus holes here also for M
set of n the fact that essentially these three
operations are done one element at a time means
that the various rules that we've established for
the realm Net+ well almost automatically hold for
this larger situation where we're considering
m sets from 3 or m sets from 5 or m sets from n
all right so we have this theorem that's suppose
that we have K m and n which are M sets from sum
N and is a fixed natural number then the various
operations addition Union intersection that are
operating here in this realm of M sets from
n obey the following laws and these will be
very familiar in fact they're exactly the same
laws that we've already seen in the context of
natural numbers but now we have capitals because
we're talking about M sets rather than individual
natural numbers but that's pretty well the only
difference so commutative laws ampersand equals
n plus m and Union N equals n Union m m intersect
N equals n intersect M associative laws k plus
M plus n equals k plus M plus n similarly for
the unions similarly for the intersections the
distributive laws which these are sort of the
novel ones because they combine addition and
union and intersection in somewhat novel ways so
k plus M Union n is k plus M Union k plus n and k
plus and intersect N equals k plus m intersect
k+ iend and these ones are the same thing just
with the order changed and here are the more
familiar distributive laws with just unions and
intersections so k union am intersect N equals
K Union M intersect K Union N and interchanging
unions and intersections k intersect M Union N
equals K intersect M Union K intersect M and here
the same laws sort of with the order swapped ok
but there are some more laws all right so there's
identity loss and here the M set which plays the
role of zero is the empty M set which has nothing
in it so the multiplicity of any of the ELLs is
always zero so empty set plus M equals m plus
empty set equals M you have to say Union M equals
M Union equals m and said intersect M equals M
intersect empty set equals empty set idempotent
laws M Union M is always mm intersect M equals M
the absorption laws that M Union M intersect N
equals M and M intersect M reunion n equals M
cancellation law that if k plus n equals m
plus n then we can cancel the ends and deduce
that k equals m and our summation law that
connects all three operations that M Union
n plus M intersect n is the same as M plus
n so nothing novel at all here really just
copying the realm laws for natural numbers and
asserting that the same laws exactly the same
laws hold for M sets from n we fix an end like
N equals 5 then the M sets from n former realm
where exactly the same laws are holding all right
what about the proofs of all these laws so this
is something I want you to give some thought
to ok so I claim that actually the situation
is dramatically simple that each of these
laws is an assertion about how many times
our number L natural number actually with L
between 1 and n occurs in the various M sets
if one M set equals another entity means that
the multiplicities of any L in this range are
equal that's what means for them to be equal so
each of these laws reduce to the corresponding
round loss for the natural numbers we restrict
our attention to adjust a specific L in this
range then the various assertions just reduce to
the corresponding assertions for natural numbers
so let's illustrate for example one of the laws
suppose that Ed is five so we're talking about
M sets from five here are a couple of M sets from
five K 1 1 to 5 M which is 2 2 3 5 and n which is
1 2 4 4 5 then how about k plus M Union n well
there is K forming the union of M and N means
that we have to go through and take the maximum
multiplicities so one occurs once here that's the
max to occurs twice here that's the max 3 occurs
on once here that's the max for Chris twice here
that's the max and 5 occurs once so there's the
union of M and N and when we add them we just put
everything together so the ones occur a total of
three times the twos occur a total of three times
there's one three in total there's a couple of
fours in total and altogether a couple of fives
in total on the other hand the distributive law
that corresponds to this is that this should be
equal to k plus M Union k plus n so let's see if
that's true k plus M just what you get when you
pop these together 1 1 2 2 2 5 3 5 and k plus
n put these two together 1 1 2 5 had 1 2 4 4 5
and the union here so again we have to go through
each element and find the maximum multiplicities 1
occurs twice here and 3 times here so there's the
Union three of them two occurs three times here
and twice here the max is three so there's three
twos in the Union three occurs once here and zero
times there store there's a single three in the
Union for occurs zero times here add twice here
so there's two in the Union five occurs twice
here add twice here the max of that is two so
this two fives and then with any luck would check
that yes these two sets are indeed equal and we've
verified one of the distributive laws in this
particular case I'd like to point out that so
this is also proving for us in the special case
when we're talking about sets which we're still
to define but I just want to point out that
we're also proving the distributive laws for
Union and intersections at the level of sets as
well here okay so this argument includes that and
it's a multiplicity kind of argument which one
often doesn't employ in set theory because the
multiplicity seems to be to a boring it's either
0 or 1 all the time it's actually a kind of useful
way of thinking about this algebra all right
so please give some thought to this proof have
a go look through the various laws it convince
yourself that they really do reduce to the laws
for the natural numbers and if I've made a mistake
point it out please will correct ourselves ok so I
want to point out that we can apply a few of the
other ideas from the natural number situation to
this much more general multiset situation in
particular the idea of sub multi-sets and the
idea of circle subtractions which occurred in that
situation can be immediately translated over again
just by Framing all the definitions in terms of
multiplicities of single numbers one at a time
so if m and n are multi sets from fixed n we could
define this ordering that m is less than or equal
to n okay we can actually use this terminology
m is less than or equal to n to mean that the
multiplicity of a given L in our standard range
you M is less than or equal to the multiplicity
of L and n so for each one of these cells from
1 to n so we can introduce this notation for
sub multi set now so making the correspondence
between multisets and natural numbers very tight
so the complete parallel so we're to do that so
this is a very interesting kind of notation and
then we can check that just as we had for natural
numbers that m is less than or equal to n it's
really equivalent to the M Union N equals n or
equivalently that the M intersect and equals M
now there's also a transitivity that if K is
less than or equal to M and M is less than or
equal to n then K is less than or equal to n and
we also introduce circle subtraction it's a kind
of a limited kind of subtraction that keeps us
in the realm of natural numbers so we can do the
same kind of thing here so if m and n are multi
sets from n we get to find M circle subtract n
to be D so we can define this that saying that
the multiplicity of L in indeed is essentially
the circle some of the multiplicities here in
other words the multiplicity of L and M minus
the multiplicity of L in the intersection
and the way we've defined this multiplicity
it's the multiplicity of L and M intersect the
multiplicity of L and n so that's another way
of describing this circle subtraction so we have
this kind of partial subtraction in the realm of
multi sets just as we do in the realm of natural
numbers okay so we haven't done anything really
profound in terms of mathematical insights here
we've just basically translated our structure
from the natural numbers into the situation
here of multi-sets multisets from the fixed
end but this is very a kind of cool thing to
do and in our next video we're gonna see that
there's a nice algebra of multisets we're going
to investigate some additional notation that
will give us even more flexibility in terms of
understanding working with and actually applying
these multi sets we want to see that these are
very very useful kind of conceptual tools we're
organizing stuff here and the kinds of things that
were organizing the way we're organizing things is
very useful for abstract algebra in other areas
of mathematics we'll see okay so next time some
algebra with multi sets I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening